Reproduction is essential for the continuation of a species.
In animals, males and females have different reproductive parts.
The reproductive parts in animals produce gametes that fuse to form a zygote.
The zygote develops into a new individual.
This type of reproduction beginning from the fusion of male and female gametes is called sexual reproduction.
The female reproductive organs are a pair of ovaries, oviducts (fallopian tubes) and the uterus.
The ovary produces female gametes.
In human beings, a single matured egg is released into the oviduct.
The fusion of a sperm and an ovum is called fertilisation.
During fertilisation, the nuclei of the sperm and the egg fuse to form a single nucleus.
This results in the formation of a fertilised egg or zygote.
Fertilisation which takes place inside the female body is called internal fertilisation.
Internal fertilisation occurs in many animals including humans, cows, dogs and hens.
Fertilisation results in the formation of an embryo.
The embryo continues to develop in the uterus.
The stage of the embryo in which all the body parts can be identified is called a foetus.
When the development of the foetus is complete, the mother gives birth to the baby.
The hard shell that you see in a hen’s egg is one such protective layer.
The embryo takes about 3 weeks to develop into a chick.
The transformation of the larva into an adult through drastic changes is called metamorphosis.
The type of reproduction in which only a single parent is involved is called asexual reproduction.
In hydra, new individuals develop from buds.
Cloning is the production of an exact copy of a cell, any other living part, or a complete organism.
Cloning of an animal was successfully performed for the first time by Ian Wilmut and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, Scotland.
They successfully cloned a sheep named Dolly.
Dolly was born on 5th July 1996 and was the first mammal to be cloned.
During the process of cloning Dolly, a cell was collected from the mammary gland of a female Finn Dorsett sheep.
The nucleus of the mammary gland cell from the Finn Dorsett sheep was inserted into the egg of the Scottish blackface ewe whose nucleus had been removed.
The egg thus produced was implanted into the Scottish blackface ewe.
Dolly was a healthy clone of the Finn Dorsett sheep and produced several offspring of her own through normal sexual means.
Dolly died on 14th February 2003.
Several attempts have been made to produce cloned mammals.
Many cloned animals die before birth or die soon after birth.
The cloned animals are many-a-times found to be born with severe abnormalities.