Animals can reproduce. 
Humans reproduce only after a certain period marked by changes. 
The most important change which marks puberty is that boys and girls become capable of reproduction. 
Puberty ends when an adolescent reaches reproductive maturity. 
All parts of the body do not grow at the same rate. 
During puberty, boys develop larger voice boxes. 
The growing voice box in boys can be seen as a protruding part of the throat called Adam’s apple. 
In girls, the larynx is hardly visible from the outside because of its small size. 
Girls have a high pitched voice, whereas boys have a deep voice. 
During puberty the secretion of sweat glands and sebaceous glands (oil glands) increases. 
Endocrine glands release hormones into the bloodstream to reach a particular body part called target site. 
Menstrual cycle is controlled by hormones. 
Reproductive life begins at puberty (10 to 12 years of age) and generally lasts till the age of 45 to 50. 
The first menstrual flow begins at puberty and is termed menarche. 
Stoppage of menstruation is termed menopause. 
All human beings have 23 pairs of chromosomes in the nucleus of every cell. 
A female has two X chromosomes, while a male has one X and one Y chromosome. 
The chromosomes of the father determine the sex of an unborn baby. 
The hormones secreted by the pituitary stimulate testes and ovaries to produce their hormones. 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland. 
Apart from the pituitary, the testes and the ovaries, there are other endocrine glands in the body such as thyroid, pancreas and adrenals. 
Thyroxine production requires the presence of iodine in water. 
If the water in which the tadpoles are growing does not contain sufficient iodine, the tadpoles cannot become adults. 
Adolescence is a stage of rapid growth and development. 
Adolescence is a period of much activity in the body and mind which is a normal part of growing up. 
The legal age for marriage is 18 years for girls and 21 years for boys. 
Early marriage and motherhood cause health problems in the mother and the child.